if you've been near a television
recently you've learned exactly one
thing the midterm elections are upon us
two days to go before the midterm
elections all eyes are on them the big
question really the only question do the
Democrats hold on to the majority and
Republicans take control of the US
Senate bottom line here is this is as we
say it every time one of the most
important elections in American history
oh but I'm serious this time
take your American history books burn
them in the streets they're worthless
after Tuesday why the senators of the
grabs I repeat the Senate is up
for grabs all this crazy attention on
congressional races is a little strange
for one important reason this Congress
with Republicans in charge of the house
and Democrats in charge of the Senate is
on track to be the least productive in
history this Congress is shaping up to
be the least productive in history
although to be fair Congress is like
jazz it's really about the bills it's
not passing it's also like jazz in that
most people hate it and anyone who says
they don't alike and the Senate is
likely to remain inactive no matter
which party controls it after Tuesday so
why all this attention on the national
level were almost nothing is happening
when down at the local level everything
is happening
that's right tonight we're gonna talk
about the elections that actually matter
on Tuesday the ones for state
legislators and look I know it can be
hard to take candidates for state houses
seriously partly because of their
ridiculous ads senator Tripp Corbin is
waiting for you in Richmond
I could stand here and tell you how was
born on a poultry farm together we can
take West Virginia's economy take off
but that's that's a great at and I'll
tell you why because you just inherently
trust the guy who wanders around in
public with a bird on his hand drape a
snake around his shoulders you've got
yourself a president right there in
Montana one candidate has an ad running
declaring his belief in the Constitution
over a shot of the Declaration of
Independence and what appears to be a
photo of an old man stabbing a small
child to death with a flag that's a
compelling image yes but I don't know if
you want to use it for a political
campaign the other problem is whenever
you do hear about state legislators it's
usually because something craziest
happened like a fistfight between two
old men in the Alabama Senate or a
Florida State Senator looking at topless
photos during an abortion debate or this
California Assemblyman discussing his
sex life into a live microphone
it's not really a surprise that you made
that mistake with a microphone you don't
seem like someone who can tell whether
something's turned on or not are doing
their jobs things can actually get worse
a Florida lawmaker is pushing forward
tonight with his plan to repeal a ban on
dwarf-tossing
I've spoken to doctors and lawyers and
CFOs that are little people they can
make their own decision in this state
said no you can't we'll make it for you
okay individual rights aside let's all
just agree that if it happened in the
wolf of Wall Street's it should not be
legal and of course sometimes you'll
hear about state legislators because of
something insane they've said like sally
kern from oklahoma is this just because
they're black that they're in prison or
could it be because they didn't want to
work hard in school and why people
oftentimes don't want to work hard
school or asians oftentimes but a lot of
times that's what happens i taught
school for 20 years and i saw a lot of a
lot of people of color who didn't want
to work as hard they want it wanted it
given to them look Sally if you're going
to be that racist in public there's
really no need for you to use the term
people of color African Americans are
not listening to everything you just
said they're going lazy hey in prison hi
people of color what that is nice that
balances it out what's that that's
basically clear now and she's not the
only one in the Oklahoma House speaking
her crazy mind I said as long as a
cancer that needed to be cut out of
American society and I stand by that I
still think that and I will not back
down and change my mind I do not doubt
that the phrase Islam is a cancer is not
usually associated with people who are
open to new ideas or what arguments
the point is is it any wonder state
legislators are perceived as circuses
when they give us footage like this
these damn bills are karate
oh damn time come out here I gotta try
to figure out a vote for my people I'm
sick of it every year feel like somebody
trying to be released for me to let my
people go
if mumsy's had said let my people go
like that I'm pretty sure Farah would
have said fine Moses I'll let them go
just calm the down
look state legislators are hilarious
there's only one problem increasingly
they're the places where most
legislation is actually taking place so
far this session Congress has passed
just 185 laws state legislatures have
passed more than 24,000 I'm starting to
realize why that guy was getting so
angry I'd hit a bill too if I knew there
were 24,000 of them sure some of those
bills were meaningless like Missouri
declaring jumping jacks their official
state exercise incidentally a New York's
official state exercise kegels not all
state laws are so silly some have
profound impact legislatures are
sometimes called the laboratories of
democracy and sometimes their
experiments a great like raising the
minimum wage like these states have done
or overturning bans on gay marriage like
these but but other times state laws can
go a different way between 2011 and 2013
individual states passed more than 200
abortion restrictions more than the
entire previous decade that's right in
fact a law which passed in Mississippi
is so restrictive it could close the one
remaining abortion clinic they have in
the entire state meaning a Mississippi
woman right now could be saying to
herself I need to go someplace more
progressive like Alabama stand houses do
a huge amount of work while no one is
watching from abortion to gun control to
environmental legislation and yet admit
it you probably don't know who your
state legislature is which means all
those conspiracy theories about a shadow
government are actually true only it's
not a group of billionaires meeting in a
mountain lair in Zurich it's a bunch of
pasty bureaucrats meeting in a
windowless
committee room in Lansing Michigan so so
we took a look at state legislators this
week and the first surprising thing was
that no two are alike because just as
each state has a treasured regional
cuisine from Maryland's Chesapeake blue
crabs to Florida's half a Cubano
sandwich wrestled away from the dirty
Pelican each each state each state has
its own way of governing for a start
they range wildly in size from 49
lawmakers in Nebraska to 424 in New
Hampshire 424 Sparta fended off Persia
with only 300 people and for some reason
New Hampshire needs 424 to issue a
kingly feast AB and while some operates
year-round others are very much
part-time Utah for instance has just one
45-day session per year that's not a
Congress that's a summer camp except
instead of eating s'mores and throwing
sticks opossums they're passing laws
restricting a woman's right to choose
and throwing sticks at possums but but
whether they're full-time or part-time
there is one thing most state houses
have in common a shocking lack of
oversight for instance when it comes to
conflicts of interest generally
lawmakers are supposed to recuse
themselves from voting on bills that
would give them a direct financial
benefit you're essentially asking state
legislators to practice self-control
control remember legislators like this
guy okay so let's look at that in action
Hawaii State House is part time and one
of its members Joe Souki
had a side job collecting $24,000 a year
as a consultant to a plastics trade
association so when Hawaii was
considering imposing a fee for plastic
bags the onus was on him to reveal his
conflict of interest let's see how that
played out I have a potential conflict
of interest what is your go-to I'm a
consultant with the American Chemistry
Council they produce plastics and right
now I'm hired as a consultant
work with Murray County on this
telephone problem thank you
thank you very much there's no conflict
what what do you mean there's no
conflict he was being paid by the
plastics industry unless in Hawaii
conflict of interest means both conflict
of interest and not a conflict of
interest you know like how Aloha means
hello and goodbye that's the only
acceptable explanation now now
to be fair most states have ethics
Commission's but an investigation into
how effective they are gave great of D
or F to 28 out of 41 of them and
remember if you fail an ethics test
that's doubly bad because there's no
way you didn't attempt to cheat
on it and yet and yet somehow with lacks
rules and terrible oversight some state
legislators still managed to get in
trouble in Massachusetts three
successive speakers of the house have
been indicted or convicted not to
mention the lawmaker that took a bribe
from an FBI undercover and stuffed the
cash in her bra stuffing bribe money in
a bra is sad for two reasons one your
corrupt but two the amount of money it
took to corrupt you fits inside your bra
we out in California state senator
Leland Yee was arrested in March on
charges of arms trafficking and wire
fraud to which he's pled not guilty but
that's not even the most interesting
part here was arrested Wednesday along
with suspected Chinatown gang figure
Raymond shrimp boy chow okay okay so
first that's amazing and secondly how is
that the photo they used of Raymond
shrimp boy chow when this one also
exists where he looks like an early 90s
Steven Seagal movie villain come on use
wild Raymond shrimp boy chow have a
photo like that taken of him unless you
wanted it used when he was inevitably
arrested for arms trafficking one guy do
the right thing and some state
legislators get in trouble in the most
pathetic possible way take Rhode
Island's Dominic Rosario whose political
career managed to weather him being
arrested for allegedly shoplifting
condoms from a CVS at the age of 41
while in office and who in 2012 was
pulled over on suspicion of drunk
driving when police were questioning
state senator Dominic Ruggeri Oh his
Senate colleague Frank Chacon pulled up
to the scene Chaconne allegedly told one
of the patrolmen quote you think you got
pension problems now wait till this
expletive is all done this guy voted
against you the last time it ain't gonna
get any better now it happened everyone
I think we just hit peak Rhode Island
think about it a legislature called
Rosario being pulled over by police
while a fellow lawmaker called Chacon
swears at them about pensions the only
way that could be more Rhode Island is
if they were all somehow clams yeah you
have to remember all the people you've
seen were elected to bodies where
legislation actually gets passed a lot
and whilst most people may ignore these
bodies corporations certainly don't in
fact they've taken advantage through a
group called Alec and yes Alec sounds
like the name of the high school
lacrosse player who just got baked and
wrecked his dad's Saab but but
incredibly it's actually even worse for
more than thirty years of private
tax-exempt organization called the
American Legislative Exchange Council
Alec has brought state lawmakers
conservative think-tanks and corporate
interests together to write model
legislation to be introduced and passed
in state houses across the country it's
basically a conservative bill mill which
has helped develop model legislation
from Arizona's notorious sb1070
immigration bill to build expanding
private prisons payday loan companies
and for-profit colleges all of which
we've talked about on this very show in
fact I'm going to list Alec in the
credits for our show as associate
producer of creating horrifying things
for us to talk about great work Alex see
you at the end of season rap party your
pieces of
Alec is everywhere roughly one in four
state legislators are members and it's
not hard to see why
Alec makes their jobs troublingly easy
here's their model electricity freedom
bill which at one point says being
therefore enacted that the state of
insert state repeals the renewable
energy mandate so as long as you can
remember and spell the name of your
state's you can introduce legislation
and I think it's fair to say that most
of the people we've seen so far tonight
could probably do that and some
legislators don't even bother hiding
Alec's fingerprints just watch a
Minnesota lawmaker get confronted by one
of his colleagues I'm just curious
does it have does the legislation have
some connection to Alec who represent
vatican's I'm not sure why we're
pursuing this course of questioning this
bill is my bill it's not Alec's bill
well the reason I ask is because earlier
you passed out a handout that says got
Walt at the top and it says health care
compact and there's a logo right in the
middle of that page and I went to the
Alec website and there's exactly the
same the same font the same size and the
same logo I mean literally it's verbatim
I hate to sound like Billy Baldwin's
agent but you can't just copy everything
that Alec does
at this point at this point it's clear
between the bad behavior and the lack of
accountability states are not so much
the laboratories of democracy as the
frat houses of democracy and yet they
get no attention and perhaps that's
because it's very hard for us to be
angry with people whose names we don't
know and if you think you will okay now
I'll pay more attention before going to
vote on Tuesday that's great
unfortunately for many of you it's too
late because an estimated 25 percent of
the candidates on tuesday.a running
unopposed their sole political asset is
that they exist and they're going to win
so with that in mind with that in mind
let's call some races because you know
what even though polls don't close for
another two days and most people haven't
even started voting yet with zero
percent of precincts reporting we can
call some winners so let's do it
remember the Florida dwarf-tossing guy
his name is rich workman he's running
unopposed so he wins remember the lady
in Oklahoma with the interesting
theories on black prison population
winner the Islam is a cancer guy winner
the alleged drunk driving Rhode Island
TomTom thief in his angry friends winner
winner chicken dinner and this is just
the beginning because we can call over a
thousand races across America he's a
winner she's a winner all these people
are winners so congratulations to all of
you for defeating the very concept of
nothing congratulations
we welding a terrifying amount of it was
that several years safer the knowledge
but no one will be paying any attention
you